# Dragons Down Cyclopedia

--- Page 1 ---

The Dragons Down Cyclopedia This Cylopedia contains the following sections: 
Lineage Advantages Class Advantages Treasure Manifest Treasure Site and Legendary Location Reference Monster and Native Reference Spell Manifest Text is taken from the Rulebooks for Dragons Down, Desolation, and Natives & Legends Permission provided by game designer Scott DeMers Revised 2025-09-05  
1

--- Page 2 ---

Lineage Advantages Dwarf (Caver) Dwarves are very comfortable in caves. Dwarves do not lose an action for spending any part of their turn in a cave clearing.Elf (Magical)Elves are raised around magic and begin the game with an extra spell from the hero starting spells deck. The selected spell must match thecolor of a magic cube they select for their hero.Gnome (Inventive)Gnomes are very inventive and crafty, often creating their own items. After all players have selected their starting items, the gnome draws 3cards from the item deck and keeps one of them. Shufﬂe the unselected item cardsback into the item deck.Half-Elves (Two-Worlds)Half-Elves straddle the worlds of elves and humans. At the beginning of the game, half-elves choose either the elven advantage or the human advantage to use for the entirety of this game session.Half-Orc (Mountaineer)Half-orcs are very comfortable in mountains and do not pay the additional action cost to enter a mountain clearing.Halﬂing (Stealthy)Halﬂings are easily overlooked due to their short stature and quiet nature. Halﬂings may reroll one monster die per hide attempt, except during the cleanup step of combat.Human (Adapted)Humans are very comfortable in civilization locations and receive one additional free action during any turn they are in a civilization location.2

--- Page 3 ---

Class Advantages Archer (Steady)Archers have spent a lifetime honing their targeting skills. Archers may reroll one ranged attack die per attack.Assassin (Backstab)The assassin is skilled at stalking their target. Assassins may ambush with a melee weapon, after which the assassin becomes unhidden.Barbarian (Mountain Lore)Barbarians grew up in the mountains. Barbarians may reroll one die during each search action performed in a mountain clearing.Bard (Musical)Bards are entertainers and minstrels in addition to being heroic. If the bard is in a civilization location at the end of the combat phase, theyroll one mission die and receive the reward rolled.Battle Mage (Power)The Battle Mage has honed the combination of magic and martial skills into one discipline. The Battle Mage may play one purple magic cubeas if it is a red might cube each combat round.Beastmaster (Faunamancy)Beastmasters can speak to wandering monsters and control them. Wandering monsters (summoned by the gray dice) do not block,challenge, or target a beastmaster, nor may a beastmaster target them. All other monsters act normally with the beastmaster. A beastmaster may attempt to hire a wandering monster via a hire action. To succeed, the beastmaster must reduce the hire price to 1x. The beastmaster only fails in a haggle attempt by rolling a doorsymbol. The beastmaster pays no actual cost to hire a wandering monster. All other hired natives rules apply (page 3). Monsters belong to no group. Thus, a closed door result on a haggle attempt does not prevent the beastmaster from hiring other wandering monsters on that same turn, even the same monster type (e.g. 2 giantbats). Beastmasters lose fame for hired monsters that are killed.The beastmaster may only have one wandering monster hired at a time. A beastmaster with a hired ﬂying monster may choose to ﬂy with the wandering monster during a move action, carrying only the beastmaster and no others natives. Beastmasters begin the game with no gold.Berserker (Berserk)Berserkers can go into a frenzy in combat. Once per combat during the challenge step, the berserker may convert one action cube of any type into a heart for the duration of combat. At the end of combat, the heart converts back to the replaced cube (killing the berserker if they lose their last heart). Berserkers begin the game with no gold.Black Knight (Feared)The Black Knight is a greatly-feared veteran of many wars, causing negotiations to go a little bit easier than for others. The Black Knight may reroll one haggle die once per trade action.Brigand (Brotherhood)The brigand is the former leader of the bandits that have been plaguing the land of Dragons Down. The brigand begins the game with anoutlaw token. The bandits are a native group to the brigand that will neither block, nor attack, the brigand. The brigand may hire them in any order (bandit leader last). The bandits respect cunning for any haggle attempts. If the brigand performs a loot action at the hideout or attacks any unhired bandit, the bandits treat the brigand like any other hero for the rest of the game and all current bandit hires of the brigand are placed back in the native tray immediately.When the brigand searches for the hideout, secret stash, or wrecked wagons, the search succeeds without rolling any dice and without triggering any hidden traps. The brigand draws one treasure from the main treasure deck, in addition to any other rewards they may receive, when they ﬁnd each of these sites.3

--- Page 4 ---

Burgess (Shrewd)Burgesses became wealthy by being shrewd and clever negotiators. The starting price for the burgess to hire a native is 3x the fame value of the native, not 4x the fame value.Cleric (Divine Protection)Clerics have the divine on their side. Any summoning die roll that would summon or move undead monsters to the cleric’s clearing maybe rerolled once per turn. The new result applies only to the Cleric’s tile, with the prior result applying everywhere else.Conjurer (Mastery)Conjurers can control the random aspects of magic. Conjurers may reroll one die for the effects of a blue spell. Examples: Reroll one hit die for an Air Sword attack or each Tentacle attack. Reroll one die for OpennGate or Teleport. Must accept the new result.Druid (Natural Emanation)Druids know the magic of nature. Druids may choose not to wound green magic cubes in a spell box containing a wound symbol when casting spells.Explorer (Perceptive)Explorers have a keen eye for the unknown, often seeing clues that others miss. Once per explore or move action, upon revealing awilderness token in a map tile, the explorer may mix the token back into the pool of wilderness tokens and draw another one. The explorer must accept this newly drawn wilderness token.Enchanter (Aura)Enchanters are adept at enchanting the world. Enchanters enchant atile using one action less than normal.Executioner (Intimidation)The Executioner is an intimidating opponent that causes others to think twice before acting. In the ﬁrst round of combat, the attack speedof all natives targeting the executioner is -1.Illusionist (Focus)Illusionists are extremely focused on their targets. When casting a spellwith a “Target” or “Self or Other” symbol on it, the illusionist may choose not to wound a cube.Knight (Health)Knights are in excellent physical shape and skilled at dressing battleﬁeld wounds. A knight may rest 1 cube for each rest action taken.Magician (Knowledge)Magicians know a little bit about many types of magic colors. Magicians may use any color of magic cube on the 2nd box of a spell card.Necromancer (Gravecalling)Necromancers have the ability to reanimate the dead as skeletal minions. If no monsters or enemy natives remain in the clearing at theend of combat, place one animated skeleton counter in the clearing for each hero, native, or non-undead monster that was killed in the clearing this turn, but not removed (e.g., ﬁery chasm removes all that it kills and does not produce animated skeletons). The necromancer may have a maximum of 4 animated skeletons in play at any time. Animated skeletons act as permanent hired natives until killed. If the necromancer is killed, all animated skeletons are also immediately killed earning fame for the hero that killed the necromancer. A necromancer earns no fame for killing their own animated skeletons, nor do they lose fame for animated skeletons that are killed. Skeletons are undead for all game purposes.Paladin (Honor)Paladins are very honorable in all of their dealings. When a paladin earn one or more LPs on a title, they earn +1 LP.Outcast (Overlooked)The outcast grew up on the edges of society, scorned by most, trusted by none, and surviving any way that they could. The outcast may notuse a trade action to look at the possessions of a merchant or buy them. They may still do all of the other options of a trade action, including 4

--- Page 5 ---

looking at and taking missions normally. When selling possessions, the outcast receives half of the gold value, rounded up. The outcast may loot a merchant’s treasures and items as ifit were a found treasure site (the outcast does not have to search for the merchant ﬁrst). Organize merchant possessions as follows: deep treasures on top of treasures on top of items. New cards that are added to the merchant for any reason are placed on top of their respective cards already with the merchant. Players may not adjust the order of cards. The outcast takes the card at the spot indicated by the loot roll.After looting (successful or not), the outcast must roll to hide (using all lineage, treasure, and sneak bonuses). If the outcast fails this hide roll, they are blocked, receive one outlaw token and may never again interact with that merchant in any way. Use the adventure journal to track merchants that are closed to the outcast.Ranger (Woods Lore)Rangers know the woods after spending years in the wilderness. When in woods clearings, rangers may reroll one search die during each search action.Rogue (Elusive)Rogues are quick on their feet and hard to catch. When evading, rogues that tie the maneuver speed of the fastest challenger may roll the two hit dice and successfully evade on a hit or equal sign result. The rogue is blocked on a miss result. Rogues challenge other heroes normally.Runesword (Control)Runeswords have spent a lifetime learning about artifacts and how to control them. Runeswords may use a blue magic cube on any color of magic box on treasure cards.Sorcerer (Specialized)Sorcerers are adept at casting magic using one discipline. If a sorcerer casts a spell using only one color of magic cube, the attack speed of thespell is +1Soulless (Incorporeal)The Soulless have a limited physical body, more akin to a spirit than a living creature. Soulless may use all hidden paths when in their normalform (not shape shifted, etc).Trickster (Illusionary Speed)The trickster is often underestimated because they are masters of role-playing and act like a buffoon. This gives the trickster an advantage incombat. When attacking, the trickster may change one hit die result from an equal symbol to a hit symbol.Warlock (Blood Lust)Warlocks heal at the expense of others. Warlocks heal one cube each time the warlock hits an unarmored, non-undead enemy with a non-spell attack.Warrior (Adept)Warriors have great dexterity and coordination. During the adjust equipment step of combat, warriors may always unequip one weapon card and equip another weapon card.Witch (Familiar)The Witch is a purveyor of arcane magic and has an familiar which does the Witch’s bidding. The familiar is psychically linked to the Witch and shares what it learns with the Witch. When playing the Witch, also take the 2 familiar tokens. Use one as the familiar hero counter and the other for turn order. The familiar has thefollowing rules:• When the familiar’s turn order token is selected, the witch takesactions for the familiar only, using the familiar’s hero counter.• The familiar follows the same rules as any other hero. The familiar may only move, explore, and search. The familiar does not ﬂy.• When an familiar moves onto a map tile, place a wilderness token/civilization tokens in the tile face-down. The witch may not look at the token(s).• When searching, the familiar may only search for a single wilderness or civilization token in the same map tile as the familiar or a hidden path in the same clearing as the familiar. Upon a5

--- Page 6 ---

successful search for any one token, the witch may look at the face-down token, but does not reveal it.•The familiar may not search for treasure sites or receive rewards from wilderness tokens (Forgotten City, items, treasures, etc.).•The witch may not look at face-down tokens except immediately after a successful search. It is good practice to record what thefamiliar sees in the adventure journal.• The familiar does not summon monsters and may not target, be targeted, block, or be blocked. It does not participate in combat.Spells may not be cast on, nor affect the familiar.• If a hero moves onto a map tile containing face-down token(s) placed by the familiar, reveal the tokens in the tile instead of selecting new token(s) for the map tile.Wizard (Studious)Wizards have spent years reading ancient texts and arcane runes. Wizards may reroll one learn spells die once per learn spells action.
6

--- Page 7 ---

Treasure Manifest Adamantium BladeMelee weapon. The optional might cube box on this card is automatically ﬁlled and does not count against the cube limit.Alchemical LureOne-time use. During the challenge step of combat, select one monster in then clearing and choose a hero, native, or monster (other than itself) in the clearing to be challenged, targeted, and attacked by the monster this combat round. The monster returns to normal behavior next combat round.Alchemist’s mixtureOne-time use. Permanently replace one color of magic cube with another color.Arcane BondOne-time use. During one hire action, the hire cost in gold is equal to the fame value. Must be used prior to any haggle attempts.Arcane SwordLegendary treasure (earns a reward as an epic treasure). Melee weapon. One box ofthis weapon must be ﬁlled with a magic cube. An enchantment cube in the map tilemay be used to ﬁll this bArmageddon HammerEpic treasure. Melee weapon. Optional might cube box on this card is automaticallyﬁlled and does not count against the cube limit.Artiﬁcer’s ConcoctionOne-time use. Ranged weapon.Ascendant OrnamentEpic treasure. A purple magic cube placed on this treasure counts as a might cube on any might box on an active card of this hero. This card can have cubes placed on it in addition to other cards.Band of SagacityEpic treasure. A yellow magic cube placed on this treasure allows the hero to rerolla hit die roll by or against them one time per combat round. This card can havecubes placed on it in addition to other cards.Banner of the BrigandsAll heroes in the clearing with the banner gain 1 matching respected icon with the bashkirs, rogues, and sellswords. All heroes in the clearing with the banner lose 1 matching respected icon with knights, soldiers, and watch. The effects are cumulative with other treasures. Must always be face-up. If face-down and viewed by a hero, it becomes active andis placed face-up (treasure pile, merchant, etc.). If its owner is killed, it is placed face-up in the clearing. Anyone entering the clearing immediately takes possession.Banner of LegitimacyAll heroes in the clearing with the banner lose 1 matching respected icon with the bashkirs, rogues, and sellswords. All heroes in the clearing with the banner gain 1 matching respected icon with the knights, soldiers, and watch. The effects are cumulative with other treasures. Must always be face-up. If face-down and viewed by a hero, it becomes active andis placed face-up (treasure pile, merchant, etc.). If its owner is killed, it is placed face-up in the clearing. Anyone entering the clearing immediately takes possession.Bard’s BouzoukiEpic treasure. The hero has +1 cunning, wisdom, and charisma while equipped.The effects are cumulative with other treasures.Baton of the Lost PrinceEpic treasure. The hero has +1 matching respected icon during a hire action. Theeffects are cumulative with other treasures.7

--- Page 8 ---

Battle StaffMelee weapon. The required might box on this card is automatically ﬁlled and doesnot count against the hero’s cube limit.Bauble of CunningIncreases the cunning attribute of the hero by one.Bejeweled BreastplateArmor. Valuable.Bejeweled HelmArmor. Valuable.Bejeweled ShieldArmor. Valuable.Belt of ExpansionGain two additional miscellaneous positions in which to carry cards.Belt of the BeastEpic treasure. Receive one might cube while the treasure is equipped.Bow of the HuntEpic treasure. Extra sharp. Ranged weapon.Bracelets of FinesseMay place one red might cube from the hero’s healthy box in an attack speed or maneuver speed box. This cube counts against the combat round limit.Bracers of VigorMay place one brown speed cube from the hero’s healthy box in a might box. This cube counts against the combat round limit.Broche of DeﬂectionOne-time use. Cancel one hit against the equipped hero.Brogans of the BirdsEpic treasure. May ﬂy during combat and for one move action taken each turn.Cape of AlterationEpic treasure. Healthy might cubes may only be placed in speed boxes. Healthy speed cubes may only be placed in might action boxes. Remember: Might cubes and boxes are red; speed cubes and boxes are brown.Casting LensOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when using this card. When this attack is resolved, the hero selects one spell on an active treasure card they possess (not in the backpack) to be cast. No magic cubes are needed to cast this spell. The spell is removed from the game when the spell expires.Champion’s BladeLegendary treasure (earns a reward as an epic treasure). Melee weapon. The attack speed of the champion’s blade is always +1.Champion’s PlateLegendary treasure (earns a reward as an epic treasure). Armor. Armor value of 4. Weight of 3. Cancels two swords.Charismatic GemstoneIncreases the charisma attribute of the hero by one.CipherstoneOne-time use. Prior to rolling the dice, automatically learn one spell on an activetreasure card in the hero’s possession (not in the backpack) during a learn spells action. The hero must have a magic cube that matches the color of the learned spell.Clashing RingPlacing a brown speed cube here increases the attack speed of the hero by one. This card can have cubes placed on it in addition to other cards.8

--- Page 9 ---

Clodpoll ClubMelee weapon. Must have less than 8 total active attribute icons in order to equip. If the hero has 8 or more active attribute icons at any time, the card is immediatelyunequipped to the backpack.Codex of CognitionEpic treasure. May reroll one die during each learn spells action.Coronet of the Lost PrinceEpic treasure. The hero has +1 matching respected icon during a hire action. The effects are cumulative with other treasures.Cursed AxeMelee weapon. Extra sharp. May not roll the hit dice. This weapon must be faster than its target’s maneuver speed to hit.Cursed TreasureInstant. Draw a treasure card from the pool to replace this card (if the Cursed Treasure card is a deep treasure card, draw a deep treasure card from the pool).Then roll on the curse table to determine a curse that affects the hero. The curse occurs even if the hero simply viewed the treasure (e,g. merchant, treasure site, etc.).Then remove the Cursed Treasure card from the game. Multiple Cursed Treasures can be drawn in succession when replacing a Cursed Treasure.Dagger of BiteMelee and ranged weapon. Extra sharp.Dancing SwordEpic treasure. The attack speed of the Dancing Sword is always +1.DecimationEpic treasure. A black magic cube may be placed on Decimation to increase thedamage delivered.Digger’s RuinMay reroll one search die once per search action while in a cave clearing.DisenchanterWhile revealed, immediately remove any magic cube on the map tile containing the Disenchanter. Disenchanting does not ﬂip the map tile over. The map tile in which the Disenchanter is located may not be enchanted for any reason. Must always be face-up. If face-down and viewed by a hero, it becomes active and is placed face-up (treasure pile, merchant, etc.). If its owner is killed, it is placed face-up in the clearing. Anyone entering the clearing immediately takes possession.Dust of DestinyOne-time use. Reroll any one die or dice roll in which you are the active hero, thetarget, or the attacker.Earthen CinctureEpic treasure. Receive one green magic cube while the treasure is equipped.Elemental SpheruleOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when using this card. When this attack is resolved, the spell, Elemental, is cast. No magic cubesare needed to cast this spell.Elven AmuletMay reroll one search die once per search action while in a woods clearing.Elven HelmArmor. Armor value of 1. No weight. Attacks that hit this armor cause no wounds.Elven ShieldArmor. Armor value of 1. No weight. Attacks that hit this armor cause no wounds.Elven SlippersEpic treasure. A green magic cube placed on this treasure increases maneuver speed by one. This card can have cubes placed on it in addition to other cards.9

--- Page 10 ---

Elven VestArmor. Armor value of 1. No weight. Attacks that hit this armor cause no wounds.Enchanted TreasureInstant. Draw a treasure card from the pool to replace this treasure, even if the hero simply viewed the treasure (e,g. merchant, treasure site, etc.). The map tile is ﬂipped over and enchanted. Place a magic cube in the map tile matching the color of magic cube shown in the enchantment circle on the Enchanted Treasure card. Then remove the Enchanted Treasure card from the game.Eternium GrimoireLegendary treasure (earns a reward as an epic treasure). When equipped, the player selects one of their hero’s healthy magic cubes and replaces it with a another magic cube of their choice. Place the original magic cube near the hero board for reference. During an alert action, the hero may change the transformed cube to any color of magic cube they wish (in addition to the other beneﬁts of the alert action). If unequipped, the original magic cube replaces the transformed magic cube.Explorer’s BootsMay use all hidden paths without ﬁnding them. Hidden paths do not become known by the hero, but they may be used.Fade EssenceOne-time use. The hero is immediately hidden. Can be used during the action phase or the cleanup step of combat, including after a failed hide rollFigurine of the StalkEpic treasure. Valuable. During the challenge step of combat, monsters always challenge an unhidden hero that possesses the ﬁgurine of the stalk. Spells and other treasures take precedence over the ﬁgurine (e.g. alchemical lure, discord, etc.). Must always be face-up. If face-down and viewed by a hero, it becomes active and is placed face-up (treasure pile, merchant, etc.). If its owner is killed, it is placed face-up in the clearing and anyone entering the clearing immediately takes possession.Foci of the SpellcasterEpic treasure. May place one magic cube in a might box. This cube must come from the hero’s healthy box and counts against the combat round limit.Gage of the ThiefMay reroll one loot die once per loot action.Galdric of EnchantmentOne-time use. The tile containing the hero immediately ﬂips over and is enchanted with a magic color of the hero’s choice. If used while the disenchanter is in the tile, the galdric is discarded with no effect.Garb of the GateEpic treasure. May move to any revealed gate clearing paying normal movementcosts as if connected by a path.Gauntlets of BrawnCounts as one might cube in an existing might box on a card. Does not add a mightbox to the card. This cube does not count against the combat round limit.Gloves of AggressionCounts as one brown speed cube in an existing attack speed box. Does not add anattack speed box. This cube does not count against the combat round limit.Golden IconEpic treasure. Valuable.Grommel’s TalismanMay reroll one search die once per search action while in a swamp clearing.Guard CharmOne-time use. May discard this treasure instead of taking one wound.10

--- Page 11 ---

Hamblen’s PendantMay reroll one search die once per search action while in a mountain clearing.Hand of the LichEpic treasure. The hero must wound one cube each turn at the end of their action phase. The attack speed of all spells cast by this hero is +1.Harmonic Hand AxeMelee and ranged weapon. Does not lose a sword icon when striking armor.HawkeyeMay reroll one search die once per search action while in a plains clearing.Helm of True SightEpic treasure. May reroll any number of dice once during each search action.Hex of ServitudeOne-time use. The hero may attempt to hire any native in the clearing during one hire action, not just the highest numbered native of a native group.Holdfast LeathersLegendary treasure (earns a reward as an epic treasure). Armor. Armor value of 2.Weight of 1. Cancels one sword. Attacks that hit this armor cause no wounds.Horn of the Dark AngelOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when usingthis card. When this attack is resolved, the spell, Fiery Chasm, is cast. No magiccubes are needed to cast this spell.Icon of the DragonEpic treasure. Valuable. During monster activation, it summons as if a malevolentmountain summoning symbol (Juvenile Dragons) and a Sound summoningsymbol (Adult Dragon) are printed on the map tile, if not already present. Printedsummoning symbols on the map tile summon normally. If the malevolent mountainand sound summoning symbols are already printed on the map tile, dragons arenot summoned twice.Must always be face-up. If face-down and viewed by a hero, it becomes active and isplaced face-up (treasure pile, merchant, etc.). If its owner is killed, it is placed face-up in the clearing and anyone entering the clearing immediately takes possession.Igneous FlameOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when usingthis card. When this attack is resolved, the spell, Fireball, is cast. No magic cubesare needed to cast this spell.Incanter’s JewelEpic treasure. Receive one blue magic cube while the treasure is equipped.Jeweled Thief’s SkullEpic treasure. Valuable.King’s PardonOne-time use. When in a civilization location, the hero may discard up to two of their outlaw tokens. May not be used to discard other player’s outlaw tokens.Mace of AbsolutionMelee weapon. Must have 3 or more active wisdom attribute icons in order to equip. If the hero has less then 3 active wisdom attribute icons at any time, the card is immediately unequipped to the backpack. The optional might cube box on this card is automatically ﬁlled and does not count against the cube limit.Mace of SmitingMelee weapon. A required might box is automatically ﬁlled and does not countagainst the hero’s cube limit.Mageshift MedallionLegendary treasure (earns a reward as an epic treasure). When equipped, the playerselects one of the hero’s magic cubes and replaces it with 2 might cubes. Place the11

--- Page 12 ---

cube near the hero board for reference. If unequipped, the two might cubes are returned to the supply and the original magic cube is returned to the hero. If either might cube being returned to the supply was wounded, the magic cube returns to the hero wounded. Once equipped, the magic cube that was replaced may not be changed unless the medallion is unequipped and then reequipped.Magical Bowl of MixingEpic treasure. A blue magic cube placed on this treasure permanently converts asingle magic cube from one color to another color, in either direction, as shown.Mirror of IdolatryEpic treasure. The hero may not sneak or alert while possessing this card. Must always be face-up. If face-down and viewed by a hero, it becomes active and isplaced face-up (treasure pile, merchant, etc.). If its owner is killed, it is placed face-up in the clearing and anyone entering the clearing immediately takes possession.Mithral ChainmailEpic treasure. Armor. Cancels one sword. Lighter than normal chainmail.Mithral Plate ArmorEpic treasure. Armor. Cancels one sword. Lighter than normal plate armor.Mithral ShieldEpic treasure. Armor. Cancels one sword. Lighter than a normal shield.Orb of Far SightEpic treasure. May perform a search action in any clearing in the current map tile or an adjacent map tile. Upon a successful search of an adjacent tile which has no wilderness or civilization tokens in it, place a matching token(s) in the tile. The hero may then look at the token and decide to place it face-down or face-up (receiving any rewards for revealing tokens).If playing using the exploration rules, the hero may explore as if in a mountainclearing regardless of the actual clearing type.Panacea of PersuasionOne-time use. The hero has +1 cunning, wisdom, and charisma this turn. Theeffects are cumulative with other treasures.Peace PendantOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when usingthis card. When this attack is resolved, the spell, Peace, is cast. No magic cubes areneeded to cast this spell.Pebble of IrritationOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when usingthis card. When this attack is resolved, the spell, Discord, is cast. No magic cubesare needed to cast this spell.Portable HoleOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when usingthis card. When this attack is resolved, the spell, Teleport, is cast. No magic cubes are needed to cast this spell.Potion of EnergyOne-time use. One additional speed cube from the healthy box may be played eachcombat round until the end of combat.Potion of FlightOne-time use. Until the end of the next Action phase, this hero may ﬂy.Potion of HealingOne-time use. Move all cubes from the wounded box to the healthy box.Potion of ManeuverOne-time use. Receive one brown speed cube permanently.12

--- Page 13 ---

Potion of MightOne-time use. Receive one red might cube permanently.Potion of ReliefOne-time use. Remove all curses and permanent spell effects. May not be used toselectively remove curses and permanent spells.Quick RingPlacing a brown speed cube here increases the maneuver speed of the hero by one.Ring of MalevolenceEpic treasure. Receive one black magic cube while the treasure is equipped.Ring of StrengthThe optional might box on one equipped weapon is automatically ﬁlled withoutusing a might cube.Ring of the MagiEnchanting a tile requires one enchant action less to take effect.Ring of TruthEpic treasure. Receive one white magic cube while the treasure is equipped.Robe of the ChanterEpic treasure. Receive one yellow magic cube while the treasure is equipped.Robust RingReceive +1 health while the treasure is equipped.Sabre of the FencerMelee weapon. May place one speed cube on this card to count as a might cube.Has the attack length of a great sword.Satchel of a GiantInstant. The hero draws and keeps two treasure cards (not deep treasure cards),then remove the Satchel of a Giant card from the game.Scepter of the SorcererEpic treasure. Receive one purple magic cube while the item is equipped.Sending StonesOne-time use. May perform one trade action as if they were in any clearing already on the map. The hero is not actually in the selected clearing and so cannot be blocked by monsters in that clearing.Shadow CloakEpic treasure. Reroll any hide reaction once per turn. Must reroll all dice.Shaman’s KaftanEpic treasure. Any magic cube placed on this treasure turns it into armor. If no magic cube is on the kaftan, then the kaftan is ignored and cannot be damaged. This card can have cubes placed on it in addition to other cards.Shield of DeﬁanceEpic treasure. Armor. Armor value of 3. Weight of 2.Shield of MercyEpic treasure. This treasure may be used as a normal shield. If a white magic cube is placed on this treasure during a combat round, the hero takes no wounds from any hits that are blocked by this shield, even if the shield is destroyed. This card can have cubes placed on it in addition to other cards.Shield of the Lost PrinceEpic Treasure. Armor. Armor value of 2. Weight of 2. Cancels 1 extra sword icon.Shoes of the ThiefMay evade as if the hero had placed three maneuver cubes. No cubes are placed andno additional cubes may be added to make it faster.Sin SwordMelee weapon. Must have 3 or more active intelligence attribute icons in order to equip. If 13

--- Page 14 ---

the hero has less then 3 active intelligence attribute icons at any time, thecard is immediately unequipped to the backpack. The optional might cube box onthis card is automatically ﬁlled and does not count against the cube limit.Skeleton KeyOpens the monolith and chamber. Avoids hidden traps at the secret cache, hideout,and wrecked wagons.Skull SplitterLegendary treasure (earns a reward as an epic treasure). Melee weapon. One mandatory might cube box on this card is automatically ﬁlled and does not countagainst the cube limit.Sparkler of WisdomIncreases the wisdom attribute of the hero by one.Spear of PiercingMelee or ranged weapon. Extra sharp. If used two-handed, damage may beoptionally increased by one.Spell Book and Spell ScrollContains 1-3 spells. When a spell book or scroll is revealed, draw the indicated number of spell cards from the deck and place them face-down under the treasurecard. A hero performing a trade action with a merchant may reveal the spell book to all players in order to draw and secretly look at the spells attached to the treasure card. The base price of the treasure card is the sum of the spells remaining with thespell book or spell scroll. The hero possessing the spell book or spell scroll may freely look at the attached spells at any time. These spells are available for a spell caster to learn if the hero has a magic cube matching the spell type.The treasure card is discarded if the last spell is removed from it, typically because a spell caster learned the spell.Staff of SoulsWhenever the staff hits an unarmored, non-undead target, the hero wielding thestaff heals one wound.Staff of the MagiEpic treasure. The hero may choose to ignore one wound symbol on a spell card.Summoning MarcationEpic treasure. Valuable. During monster activation, it summons as if all localmonster die summoning icons printed on map tiles in adjacent tiles are also locatedin the map tile containing the summoning marcation.Must always be face-up. If face-down and viewed by a hero, it becomes active andis placed face-up (treasure pile, merchant, etc). If its owner is killed, it is placedface-up in the clearing. Anyone entering the clearing immediately takes possession.Sword of the Lost PrinceEpic treasure. Has a sword icon on two different might boxes. Valuable.Sword of TormentEpic treasure. Extra sharp. The hero loses one health while this treasure is equipped.The hero regains the health if the treasure is unequipped.Symbol of AlertnessMay perform one alert action which does not count against the turn’s action limit.Symbol of CommerceMay perform one trade action which does not count against the turn’s action limit.Symbol of GreedMay perform one loot action which does not count against the turn’s action limit.Symbol of KnowledgeMay perform one learn spells action which does not count against the turn’s actionlimit.14

--- Page 15 ---

Symbol of MagicMay perform one enchant action which does not count against the turn’s actionlimit.Symbol of MotionMay perform one move action which does not count against the turn’s action limit.Symbol of RestMay perform one rest action which does not count against the turn’s action limit.Symbol of StealthMay perform one sneak action which does not count against the turn’s action limit.Symbol of VisionMay perform one search action which does not count against the turn’s action limit.Talaria of the GladiatorCounts as one brown speed cube in an existing maneuver speed box. Does not add a maneuver box. This cube does not count against the combat round limit.Taper of IlluminationEpic Treasure. Do not lose an action when in a cave clearing on the hero’s turn.Temporary Mist StoneOne-time use. Cubes may not be placed on other weapon or spell cards when usingthis card. When this attack is resolved, a temporary version of the spell, Vapor Form, is cast. The spell expires at the end of the action phase of the next turn. No magic cubes are needed to cast this spell.Thief ’s Lucky CoinOne-time use. Roll one die during one loot action.Time StoneOne-time use. One attack in the clearing that ties on maneuver speed hits the target.Tinkerer’s TimepieceOne-time use. The hero may take 2 extra actions of their choice on their turn.Tome of ConjuringOne-time use. Receive one blue magic cube permanently.Tome of FayOne-time use. Receive one yellow magic cube permanently.Tome of NatureOne-time use. Receive one green magic cube permanently.Tome of PowerOne-time use. Receive one purple magic cube permanently.Tome of RighteousnessOne-time use. Receive one white magic cube permanently.Tome of the Black ArtsOne-time use. Receive one black magic cube permanently.Tome of TricksOne-time use. Receive one grey magic cube permanently.Tome of WizardryOne-time use. Receive one magic cube of the hero’s choice permanently.Trickster’s StoneEpic treasure. Receive one grey magic cube while the treasure is equipped.Tricky RingEpic treasure. A grey magic cube placed on this treasure increases the hero’s attackspeed by one. This card can have cubes placed on it in addition to other cards.15

--- Page 16 ---

Vain BladeMelee weapon. Must have 3 or more active charisma attribute icons in order to equip. If the hero has less then 3 active charisma attribute icons at any time, the card is immediately unequipped to the backpack.Vorpal CutlassMelee weapon. Extra sharp.Wand of the MagicianEpic treasure. When casting targeted spells, may reroll one or two hit dice on each hit dice roll.WarbladeMelee weapon. Requires that one speed cube be placed on this treasure in lieu of a might cube.Whispering CompassOne-time use. May use all hidden paths this turn, even if not found. Used hidden paths are not found.Writ of RedemptionOne-time use. The price to buy any one card from a merchant is 1x the base price.
16

--- Page 17 ---

Treasure Site and Legendary Location Reference Adventurer’s CorpseA hero that has found the Adventurer’s Corpse may approach the corpse as oneof their actions during their turn. Upon approaching the corpse, complete thefollowing steps.• Shufﬂe the Holdfast Leathers and the Skull Splitter legendary treasure cards together with any deep treasure cards that are in the site containing the Adventurer’s Corpse. Place the shufﬂed deep treasure cards on top of any treasure cards in the treasure site. The site is looted per normal rules.• The hero receives one random curse.• Remove the Adventurer’s Corpse legendary location card and token fromthe game.Arcanis EngimaA hero that has found the arcanis enigma may attempt to solve the puzzle as one oftheir actions during their turn. Roll the 2 haggle dice.• If either die shows a closed door, the hero receives one random curse andthe attempt fails.• If the hero rolls higher than their cunning, the attempt fails, but the herosuffers no consequences.• If the hero rolls less than or equal to their cunning, the attempt succeeds.º If the map tile is not enchanted with both blue and purple cubes, ﬂip the map tile and enchant it with both blue and purple magic cubes.º If the map tile is already enchanted with both blue and purple cubeswhen a success is rolled, the hero receives the Mageshift Medalion.Remove the Arcanis Engima legendary location card and token fromthe game.Cavernous PitWhen the Cavernous Pit is ﬁrst revealed, draw two cards from the deep treasurepile and place them on top of the Cavernous Pit legendary location card.A hero that has found the Cavernous Pit may attempt to climb into the pit as oneof their actions during their turn. The player places cubes to ﬁll attack speed boxeson their lineage, class, and treasure cards as they wish. The number of ﬁlled boxesis their dexterity. Boxes on weapons do not count. The hero rolls the 2 haggle dice.• If either die shows a closed door, the hero receives one wound.• If the hero rolls higher than their dexterity, the attempt fails, but the herosuffers no consequences.• If the hero rolls less than or equal to their dexterity, the attempt succeeds.º Draw one deep treasure card from the Cavernous Pit card.º If the ﬁnal deep treasure card is drawn from the Cavernous Pit, remove the Cavernous Pit legendary location card and token from the game.CatacombsLabyrinth: One side of the terrain pack setup card includes a labyrinth at the catacombs. Any loot attempt die result that is higher than the cunning attribute of the hero automatically fails, even if the loot roll would normally have resulted in a treasure being received.Collapsed PassageWhen the Collapsed Passage is ﬁrst revealed, draw two cards from the deep treasure pile and place them on top of the Collapsed Passage legendary location card.A hero that has found the Collapsed Passage may attempt to clear the passage asone of their actions during their turn. Roll the 2 haggle dice and compare the resultto the number of might cubes in the hero’s healthy box.• If either die shows a closed door, the hero receives one wound.17

--- Page 18 ---

• If the hero rolls higher than their might cubes, the attempt fails, but thehero suffers no consequences.• If the hero rolls less than or equal to their might cubes, the attempt succeeds.º Draw one deep treasure card from the Collapsed Passage card.ºIf the ﬁnal deep treasure card is drawn from the Collapsed Passage, remove the legendary location card and token from the game.ChamberMassive Door: One side of the terrain pack setup card includes a massive door on the chamber. No hero may loot the chamber until it is opened. The chamber is opened by an attack upon it that causes 4 or more damage (including sword icons), by a hero possessing the skeleton key, or by a hero possessing 4 healthy might cubes when no monsters are present. Once opened, any hero may loot the chamber.Grave of the ChampionWhen the Grave of the Champion is ﬁrst revealed, draw one card from the deeptreasure pile and shufﬂe it together with the Champion’s Plate and Champion’s Bladelegendary treasure cards. Place these cards on top of the Grave of the Championlegendary location card.Once found, heroes may use a loot action to loot the Grave of the Champion as they would any other treasure site. When looting the Grave of the Champion, a loot roll of 5 on either loot die causes the hero to receive a random curse.HideoutHidden Trap: Side 2 of the terrain pack setup card includes a hidden trap on the hideout. The hero that ﬁrst ﬁnds the secret cache must wound one random cube or heart unless they possess the skeleton key treasure.Infernal GlyphsA hero that has found the Infernal Glyphs may attempt to read the glyphs as one oftheir actions during their turn. Roll the 2 learn spells dice and compare the resultsto the Infernal Glyphs card. Apply any beneﬁts that would normally apply whenlearning spells (lineage and class advantages, treasures, spells, etc.).• If both dice show curse symbols, roll both of the numbered summoningdice and summon a number of wandering monsters equal to the gray dieand a number of local monsters equal to the black die to the hero’s clearing.Monsters already in the map tile do not move. Arriving monsters will attempt to block the hero immediately.• If one die shows a curse symbol, but the other does not, the hero receivesone random curse.• If the hero rolls two spell book symbols, the attempt succeeds.º If the map tile is not enchanted with both a black and gray cube, ﬂip the map tile and enchant it with a black and a gray cube.º If the map tile is already enchanted with both a black and gray cube when a success is rolled, draw 3 cards from the top of the spell deck and look at them. The player may select any one spell from those drawn and learn it, earning the reward for learning a spell. The hero must be able to learn the selected spell. Shufﬂe all spells not learned back into the spells deck.• A hero taking subsequent read the glyphs actions on the same turn after a failed attempt does not need to reroll dice that show spell book symbols.The Infernal Glyphs are a site, and thus permanent. There is no limit to the numberof times a hero may attempt to read the glyphs.Lost BattalionDisembodied: Side 2 of the terrain pack setup card has disembodied treasuresfor the lost battalion. The lost battalion site may not be looted until the last lostbattalion monster is killed.Monolith18

--- Page 19 ---

Magic Seal: Side 2 of the terrain pack setup card includes a magic seal on themonolith. The monolith may not be looted until it is opened. The monolith may be opened at any time by wounding any magic cube or by possessing the skeleton key treasure. Once opened, any hero may loot the monolith.Riddle of the ImpA hero that has found the Riddle of the Imp may attempt to solve the riddle as oneof their actions during their turn. Roll the 2 haggle dice.• If both dice show a closed door, the imp monster chip is placed in theclearing and the imp blocks the hero, even if the hero was hidden.º During the combat phase, the imp will act like a normal monster, except it will challenge and target this hero in all combat rounds, even if other heroes or hired natives are present. If using the optional luring rules, it cannot be lured.º If this hero is killed, the imp is immediately removed from the map and returned to the chip tray, even in the middle of a combat round.º A hero that kills the imp receives the fame value as normal. If killed, the imp chip is taken as a reward and the Riddle of the Imp legendary location card and token is removed from the game.º If combat ends in the round, the imp chip is returned to the chip tray.• If the hero rolls higher than their wisdom, the hero receives one randomcurse.• If the hero rolls less than or equal to their wisdom, the attempt succeeds.º If the map tile is not enchanted with both yellow and another cube, ﬂip the map tile and enchant it with a yellow cube and a magic cube of the player’s choice (other than yellow).º If the map tile is already enchanted with both yellow and another cube when a success is rolled, the hero takes the imp chip as a reward and earns the indicated fame value. In addition, the hero may choose any magic cube they wish and places it in their healthy box. Remove the Riddle of the Imp legendary location card and token from the game.Secret CacheWhen the secret cache is searched for and found by a hero, it does not need to belooted. The hero that ﬁrst ﬁnds the secret cache immediately takes both the deep treasure and the gold as if they had performed a successful loot action. The hero receives the legend point and fame reward for ﬁnding a treasure site.If playing with the Dragons Down: Desolation expansion, the bandits can be summoned to multiple locations. The red arrow near the secret cache indicates that the chips for the bandits might be located on another setup card. The Bandits always summon as a group as if they were a single guardian.Hidden Trap: Side 2 of the terrain pack setup card includes a hidden trap on thesecret cache. The hero that ﬁrst ﬁnds the secret cache must wound one random cube or heart unless they possess the skeleton key treasure.ShrineActive Wraith: One side of the terrain pack setup card includes an active wraithat the shrine. After any loot attempt that results in a treasure being looted, immediately roll the local monster die. If it shows a treasure site symbol, the wraith is immediately summoned to the shrine from wherever it is located. Ignore allother results and monsters.SmugglerThe Smuggler respects no attributes and uses whatever is the lowest attribute scoreof the haggling hero.Spellcaster’s SimulacrumWhen the Spellcaster’s Simulacrum is ﬁrst revealed, draw one card from the deeptreasure pile and shufﬂe it together with the Eternium Grimoire and Arcane Swordlegendary treasure cards. Place these cards on top of the Spellcaster’s Simulacrum19

--- Page 20 ---

legendary location card. Once found, heroes may use a loot action to loot the Spellcaster’s Simulacrum as they would any other treasure site. If a hero rolls a 5 on either loot die, they receive a random curse.Statue of the TemplarA hero that has found the Statue of the Templar may attempt to awaken the statueas one of their actions during their turn. Roll the 2 haggle dice.• If both dice show a closed door, the statue monster chip is placed in theclearing and the statue blocks the hero, even if the hero was hidden.º During the combat phase, the statue will act like a normal monster, except it will challenge and target this hero in all combat rounds, even if other heroes or hired natives are present. If using the optional luringrules, it cannot be lured.º If this hero is killed, the statue is immediately removed from the map and returned to the chip tray, even in the middle of a combat round.º A hero that kills the statue receives the fame value as normal. If killed, the statue chip is taken as a reward and the Statue of the Templar legendary location card and token is removed from the game.º If combat ends in the round, the statue chip is returned to the chip tray.• If one die shows a closed door, the hero receives one random curse.• If the hero rolls higher than their charisma, the attempt fails.• If the hero rolls less than or equal to their charisma, the attempt succeeds.º If the map tile is not enchanted with both white and green cubes, ﬂip the map tile and enchant it with both white and green cubes.º If the map tile is already enchanted with both white and green cubes when a success is rolled, the hero takes the statue chip as a hired native at no cost. The statue has an inﬁnite hire term. All other hired natives rules apply (page 3). Remove the Statue of the Templar legendary location card and token from the game.Treacherous LedgeWhen the Treacherous Ledge is ﬁrst revealed, draw two cards from the deep treasurepile and place them on top of the Treacherous Ledge legendary location card.A hero that has found the Treacherous Ledge may attempt to cross the ledge as oneof their actions during their turn. The player places cubes to ﬁll maneuver speedboxes on their lineage, class, and treasure cards as they wish. The number of ﬁlledboxes is their dexterity. Boxes on weapons do not count. The hero rolls the 2 haggledice.• If either die shows a closed door, the hero receives one wound.• If the hero rolls higher than their dexterity, the attempt fails, but the herosuffers no consequences.• If the hero rolls less than or equal to their dexterity, the attempt succeeds.º Draw one deep treasure card from the Treacherous Ledge card. If the ﬁnal deep treasure card is drawn from the Treacherous Ledge, remove the legendary location card and token from the game.Wrecked WagonsWhen the wrecked wagons are searched for and found by a hero, they do not need to be looted. The hero that ﬁrst ﬁnds the wrecked wagons receives the legend point and fame reward, and takes the treasures and gold as if they had performed successful loot actions.Hidden Trap: Side 2 of the terrain pack setup card includes a hidden trap on the wrecked wagons. The hero that ﬁrst ﬁnds the wrecked wagons must wound one random cube or heart unless they possess the skeleton key treasure.
20

--- Page 21 ---

Monster and Native Reference Unique MonstersAll Guardians, the Orc Lord, Orc Champion, Goblin King, and Kobold Rex are considered unique monsters. Unique monsters are immune to some game effects, such as being selected for the Shape Shift spell.BanditsDragons Down: Desolation introduces additional treasure sites to which the Bandits may be summoned. The Bandits may appear at the Hideout, Secret Cache, and/or Wrecked Wagons. The red arrow next to the bandits on the setup cards indicates that the bandits counters might be located on another setup card. The bandits may summon from the setup cards or the map. If on the map, the bandits will not leave a treasure site clearing that contains a hero. If the bandits are summoned to multiple clearings simultaneously,DemonThe Demon casts Fiery Chasm on the back side of the counter. If so, follow the rules of the Fiery Chasm spell as normal. Since the Demon is a ﬂying monster, it is immune to the effects of the spell.DragonsThe Great Drake, Great Wyrm, and Adult Dragons may breathe ﬁre. Dragons breathing ﬁre follow the characteristics of the Fireball spell (including targeting up to 4 heroes in the clearing). A dragon’s ﬁreball is not a spell and is treated as a non-magical, ranged attack. Dragons will target up to 4 heroes in the clearing (determine randomly if more than 4 heroes are present). If only one hero is present,dragons will target only the one hero and the attack will be stronger per the spell.Elf 2Elf 2 casts hesitation depending on her tactics. She will not target a hero, native, or monster that is already under the effects of a hesitation spell with another hesitationspell, if possible.LichThe Lich casts Vapor Form on the back side of the counter. If so, the Lich casts it on their target, not on itself. The Lich may cast Vapor Form on a new target every combat round. Follow the rules of the Vapor Form spell as normal.Lizardfolk ShamanThe Lizardfolk Shaman is a unique monster. The front side of the Shaman casts theElemental spell. Once summoned, the elemental behaves like a regular monster.The elemental immediately disappears if the Shaman is killed (earning no points for killing the elemental should this occur). The Shaman may not summon multiple elementals. If a Shaman-summoned elemental is alive when the Shaman’s Elemental attack is processed, simply ignore the spell. The Shaman does not attack that round.OmnicruxThe Omnicrux only attacks with spells. The front side is a Fireball spell which the Omnicrux will use to target up to 4 heroes in the clearing (determine randomly if more than 4 heroes are present). If only one hero is present, the Omnicrux will target only the one hero. This is a spell attack, different than a dragon breathing ﬁre. The back side is a Disorient spell. Should the disorient spell hit a hero, immediatelyﬂip over the Omnicrux (it does not attack again this round). The Omnicrux may ﬂip over normally during the monster tactics step of combat. There is no limit tothe number of times a hero may be disoriented by the Omnicrux, but the effects arenot cumulative.21

--- Page 22 ---

Rogue 4Rogue 4 casts afﬂiction and illusion depending on his tactics. When casting illusion,he will cast it on a random unhired native, including himself, not already under theeffects of an illusion spell.TitanThe Titan casts Teleport on the front side of the counter. If so, the Titan casts iton their target, not on itself. Follow the rules of the Teleport spell as normal. To determine the tile to which the target is teleported, roll both of the summoning dice to determine a terrain and a tile symbol. If either die roll is not in play, rerollthat die until a tile in play is determined. Then roll a d6 to determine the clearing.
22

--- Page 23 ---

Spell Manifest UNIVERSAL SPELLSUniversal spells are accessible to all magic users and represent magic that requires no speciﬁc discipline of study. All casters of magic have access to spells from the universal arts.Break SpellsTargeted. Instantaneous. Use any color(s) of cubes. Wound one cube. Immediately cancels all curses and spells on the target.
23

--- Page 24 ---

BLACK SPELLSBlack spells are from the realm of death and evil. Black spells tend to bring misfortune, curses, and death to those targeted by it. Blackmagic is not subtle.AfﬂictionTargeted. Instantaneous. If the spell hits, the target immediately suffers one wound.CurseTargeted. Instantaneous. Wound one black cube. If the spell hits, the target receivesone random curse from the curse table. The curse is permanent unless removed via the Break Spells spell or by paying to remove curses at a civilization location. Curses are not-cumulative, but a hero can have multiple curses.Dark MatterTargeted. Permanent. Wound one black cube. If the spell hits a monster or native, swap might and attack speed and ignore sword icons. If a monster is casting a spell, the new attack speed is equal to the number of spell boxes on the matching spell card and the monster attacks with might equal to the old attack speed.If the spell hits a player, might (red) cubes must be played on speed (brown) boxes and speed (brown) cubes must be played on might (red) boxes. Unresolved attacks swap speed and might cubes immediately as the targeted hero wishes, and may alter or cancel attacks. Example: not enough brown cubes to satisfy the mandatory might of a weapon.Rule UndeadTargeted. Combat. Wound one black cube. If the spell hits, the targeted undead monster is controlled by the caster for the rest of combat, or until the caster is killed, targets the monster, or leaves the clearing. If the monster’s attack has not yet been resolved on the combat round in which the spell takes effect, the caster decides if the monster’s attack is canceled or continues. The caster receives all rewards for kills made by the controlled monster. The caster receives normal fame if the undead monster is killed by the caster.Fiery ChasmInstantaneous. Wound one Black cube. Attacks all unhidden, non-ﬂying heroes and monsters in the clearing, including the caster. All targets that are hit by the ﬁery chasm are immediately killed and any possessions are removed from the game.
24

--- Page 25 ---

BLUE SPELLSBlue spells are from the realm of conjuring. Blue magic focuses on manifesting and controlling things in the real world. Blue spells tend to break the rules of the physical world for the caster.Floating DiskSelf or other. Turn. The targeted hero may have any number of active treasures in their miscellaneous locations.Open GateTargeted. Instantaneous. Wound one blue cube. If the spell hits, the target is placed in a random clearing containing a revealed gate.TentaclesCombat. Wound one blue cube. The caster places 4 tentacles on any number of targets, then roll the hit dice for each tentacle. Each double hit result lowers the target’s maneuver speed by one. Each single hit result lowers the target’s attack speed by one. Misses have no effect. Tentacles placed on dead targets may be placed elsewhere prior to the hero tactics step, otherwise they remain in place and the effects continue until the target is dead or the caster dies or leaves the clearing. Roll for the effect of newly placed tentacles immediately. If the caster is hidden, they must roll to stay hidden in any combat round that a tentacle is newly placed.Air SwordCombat. Wound one blue cube. Beginning next combat round, in addition to any spells or attacks the caster wishes to do in combat, the caster controls a sword with a might of 2 and 1 sword icon that attacks with a speed of 2 (attack length 6). The Air Sword may not be targeted and is immediately removed if the caster is killed or leaves the clearing. The caster receives all rewards for kills made by the Air Sword.If the caster is hidden, they must roll to stay hidden at the end of each combatround while the air sword is in play.TeleportTargeted. Instantaneous. Wound one blue cube. If the spell hits, the caster chooses a map tile up to two tiles away. Move the target to a random clearing on that tile.
25

--- Page 26 ---

GRAY SPELLSGray spells are from the realm of trickery. Gray spells often involve altering the view of the world around the caster to confuse others, obfuscate reality, or making things disappear completely.DivinationSelf or other. Turn. The targeted hero may reroll any number of dice during one loot action.EnvenomSelf or other. Combat. Wound one gray cube. +1 sword icon to the next hit made bythe envenomed hero or monster. If the hit target is not killed, it suffers +1 wound. Envenom affects the next hit regardless of whether it is made with a weapon, spell,or treasure. Envenom has no effect on the undead.IllusionSelf or other. Combat. Wound one gray cube. All attackers targeting the hero or monster suffer -1 to their attack speed. The effect is not cumulative with other illusion spells.Anti-MagicSelf or other. Combat. Wound one gray cube. The hero or monster may not be targeted by any spell with the target symbol on it. Indirect effects of spells without a target symbol may still affect the hero or monster. Anti-Magic does not affect the ﬁreball of a dragon, but does affect other monsters that cast ﬁreball.Vapor FormTargeted. Permanent. Wound one gray cube. If the spell hits, the hero or monster,and all possessions becomes vapor. All cubes are unavailable. All possessions areinactive (as if they were in the backpack). The target takes no part in combat. Theymay not block or be blocked. They may only perform the explore and move actions.They may use all hidden paths while in vapor form, even if not found. Used hiddenpaths are not found.26

--- Page 27 ---

GREEN SPELLSGreen spells are from the realm of nature. Green magic seeks to live harmoniously with the natural world. Green magic calls upon the wild to aid the caster.Nature’s HelpSelf or other. Turn. The targeted hero may reroll any number of dice during one search action.Trail BlazeSelf or other. Turn. Wound one green cube. The hero may move one clearing for each move action, regardless of the clearing type being entered.Move EarthInstantaneous. Wound one green cube. The caster may rotate the map tile they arein, or any adjacent map tile, to any orientation they wish. All paths on all tiles mustalways connect to other paths.CalmTargeted. Instantaneous. Wound one green cube. If the spell hits, the caster may return the monster to the appropriate monster tray location. The spell has no effect on heroes, guardians, or the undead.ElementalCombat. Wound one green cube. Randomly select one of the elemental counters and place it in the clearing. Starting next combat round, the elemental participates in combat under control of the caster. A caster earns no fame for killing their own elemental, but earns fame for kills made by the elemental. The spell expires if the elemental is killed. The spell expires if the elemental is killed, the spell caster is killed, or the spell caster leaves the clearing.
27

--- Page 28 ---

PURPLE SPELLSPurple spells are from the realm of sorcery. Purple magic is about the raw power of magic calling upon sorcery to create energy and control it in the real world. Purple spells create, change, and destroy.Iron SkinSelf or other. Combat. A hit against this target that does not strike armor follows the rules for armored monsters (removes one sword icon).StrengthSelf or other. Combat. Wound one purple cube. The target’s next hit during this combat phase causes +1 base damage. Strength spells are not cumulative.FlySelf or other. Turn. Wound one Purple cube. The hero can ﬂy until the end of the action phase next turn (see Flying in the other rules section).FireballTargeted (up to 4 targets). Ranged Attack. Instantaneous. Wound one Purple cube.Each target the spell individually hits is attacked by a separate ranged attack with a base damage of 2 + 1 sword. If only one target is selected, the spell has a base damage of 2 + 2 swords. Note: A dragon’s ﬁreball is not a spell, but has the effect of a ﬁreball.Shape ShiftSelf. Permanent. Wound one Purple cube. When this spell is cast the caster selectsany non-undead, non-unique monster counter (no guardians or leaders. e.g. KoboldRex) from the monster tray and replaces their hero with it. The caster may chooseeither side of the monster counter to be face-up during hero tactics each combatround and ignores the monster tactics step. The hero ﬁghts as a monster usingthe face-up monster characteristics, ignoring their own cubes and possessions. Allmonster wounds are healed at the end of combat.While Shape Shift is active, the hero may perform sneak, make noise, move, search,and loot actions. All cubes are unavailable. All possessions are inactive (as if in thebackpack). Possessions gained while shape shifted are placed in the backpack.When inactive, place the monster counter near the target’s hero board. If the spellis canceled, return the monster to the appropriate monster tray location.
28

--- Page 29 ---

WHITE SPELLSWhite spells are from the realm of life and good. White spells tendto heal, promote life, and bring peace. White magic targets theundead as an abomination.Soul SaveSelf or other. Combat. Undead that attack this hero or monster must reroll the mostfavorable single hit die result rolled, unless both die results were blank.HealSelf or other. Combat. Wound one white cube. If the target is a hero, move anytwo cubes currently in the wounded box to the healthy box. If a monster, remove 2wound cubes (pink cubes). May only be cast once per turn.Life ArmorSelf or other. Combat. Wound one white cube. If the target is a hero, they are protected by weightless armor of strength 2. The armor created by this spell must always be hit ﬁrst by attacks on this target. It can be damaged and destroyed. It does not prevent wounds. If the target is a monster, it gains armored status.Turn UndeadInstantaneous. Wound one white cube. All undead in the clearing are killed.PeaceInstantaneous. Wound one white cube. Combat immediately ends in the clearing. Do not ﬁnish the combat round.
29

--- Page 30 ---

YELLOW SPELLSYellow spells are from the realm of enchantment. Yellow spells tendto enchant, befuddle, and mesmerize. Yellow magic is subtle, but powerful for the caster who wields it well.HesitationTargeted. Combat. If the spell hits, the target suffers -1 to their maneuver speed thenext time this target is attacked. The spell expires immediately after resolving thatattack. Hesitation is not cumulative with other hesitation spells.ConfuseTargeted. Combat. Wound one yellow cube. If the spell hits, the target may not castspells. Spells already cast are unaffected. If the target is casting a spell that has notyet been resolved this combat round, it is canceled.CharmSelf or other. Turn. Wound one yellow cube. All attributes are +2 for all missionreward die rolls and haggle attempts.DisorientTargeted. Combat. Wound one yellow cube. Any unresolved attacks this roundmade by the target are canceled. The target may not attack in future combat roundsunless targeted or hit. Once targeted or hit, they may choose a target normally. Theattack speed of the next attack performed by the target is at -2 speed. Disorient isnot cumulative with other disorient spells.DiscordTargeted (2 targets). Combat. Wound one yellow cube. The spell must hit twomonsters in the same combat round to take effect. If the spell hits two monsters,cancel their current attacks this combat round. On future combat rounds, bothmonsters will challenge and target each other until one of them is dead or combatends in the clearing. The caster does not control the monsters, so they are nottargeted by other monsters. The caster earns fame for any kills made by thesemonsters while the spell is active. The spell expires if, at the end of a combat round,one or both monsters are killed.
30